---
title: "Worker Health Safety During COVID-19 in Bangladesh"
date: '2020-09-13T12:40:15+06:00'
draft: false

tags: ["RMG", "export", "COVID-19"]
categories: ["Economics"]

--- 
Imagine losing a country’s chief economic driving force, built up over a span of four decades, in just three months. This is what the COVID-19 pandemic was going to do to Bangladesh, or at least threatening to, when USD 3.18 Billion worth of orders were canceled in March 2020. 

The Readymade Garments industry has been the country’s backbone for some time now. The sector alone accounts for 84% of the country’s export earnings. This kind of massive overdependence on only one industry has threatened to cripple Bangladesh’s economy once before in 2013 when the structural failure of a local factory in Dhaka resulted in the tragic loss of 1,134 lives. The government and industry regulators were under a lot of pressure to make sure that the ongoing pandemic does not result in another parade of lost lives like that again. The wide range of panic and confusion among both the government and industry stakeholders regarding whether to reopen the factories was both understandable and justifiable.

Amidst all the debates and controversies, the government and the Bangladesh Garment Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA) finally decided to reopen some factories in the first phase with less than 30% of workers on April 26, provided they follow the health codes very strictly. BGMEA issued a general directive for countrywide factories on April 22 regarding the health codes for the workers in the factories In the second phase, on 2 May, based on the success of following health and safety guidelines, factories were permitted to work with an additional 20% of the original workforce. 

On paper, these initiatives may seem safe and reasonable but the real scenario was anything but. Hundreds of factories resumed their operations within a day of the reopening announcement, some with reportedly 70-80% of their workforce, completely ignoring BGMEA’s clear order to only call back employees that live nearby (The Business Standard, April 28). Thousands of workers left their village for Dhaka on foot or on whatever transport they could find, during a total lockdown. 

It gets much worse. A report published in the Guardian on May 11 states that workers at garment factories in the industrial areas of Gazipur and Ashulia, on the outskirts of the capital Dhaka, were only subject to hand-washing at the entrance as part of the new measures against COVID-19. It also reported that no physical distancing measures had been enforced inside the factories. The factory owners were at a fix too. With the threat of losing millions of dollars worth of work orders looming over their head, they had to decide whether to reopen with as much as workers possible or suffer a gigantic loss that may as well be their last one. Having more workers meant more products in one day and less cost per unit produced, granting them a profit margin to stay in business. On top of that, there was zero incentive for them to ensure proper health safety for workers, which would incur an additional cost of production, and operate with a minimal number of workers. It would have been a hard decision but the perpetual lack of business ethics in the workplace made it easy. The result? Workers were being forced to choose between their well-being and their livelihood.

With almost zero social distancing, occasional hand-washing, and the barely used masks, it was only a matter of time that the number of COVID-19 infected workers soared, and it did. Within May 12, over 100 workers were tested positive, forcing the BGMEA authority to conduct inspections in 461 factories. At least 20 of the inspected factories failed to follow the health codes prescribed by the government and BGMEA. While the number of factories visited is of some credit, in reality, it represents only a mere 10% of over 4600 factories in operation employing a staggering 4 million workforce under the RMG industry.

The BGMEA directives were comprehensive and if nothing else, could have ensured proper safety for workers provided the factory management follow them throughout. However, except for a handful of factories, most of them resorted to the bare minimum with no social distancing, further contributing to the rising number of infected workers. One of the factories that actually followed the instructions was AJI group. It resumed its operations on 26th April with only 305 of its workers following the BGMEA directive. It also updated its company health safety codes to match the new measures against COVID-19. Every employee was taught the new guidelines in place and was strictly monitored for any violations.

On June 10, BGMEA reported 299 confirmed cases of COVID-19. However, there had been controversies regarding the actual number. Joly Talukder, president of the Garment Workers’ Trade Union Centre, indicated that the real number was several thousand (bdnews24.com, June 10).

A sign of improvement in worker safety was observed after various national-level organizations put more pressure on the factory owners and took strict measures against the perpetrators. International Labor Organization partnered up with the BGMEA and the BKMEA to launch a virtual training package with an aim to safer working conditions in Bangladesh. The course will train nominated candidates to send them as trainers on worker health safety to various factories.

After 6 months of continuous negative returns, Bangladesh’s RMG sector finally bounced back up. According to a report published in The Business Standard on September 02, between August 1 and 30 this year, Bangladesh’s apparel shipments amounted to $3238.75 million, up from $2239.29 million, a 45% year-on-year growth. While this piece is being written, Rubana Huq, BGMEA president, announced that 80-90% of the $3.18 billion canceled work orders have been reinstated after "die-hard engagements" with buyers (The Daily Star, September 10). 

The industry outcomes are certainly praiseworthy. It took nothing short of a collective effort on all fronts. It is only natural to ask ourselves whether, in the months following the pandemic, we ended up making a trade-off between worker health safety and profitability. Perhaps even the bigger question is, should there ever be a trade-off in the first place?
